---
layout: post
title: Who I am with IAM!
---

One of the basic requirment working with any cloud is to grant necessary permission to go perform tasks on resources of interest. This article is a gentle introduction to help create a mental model of what IAM(Identity and access management) is in a cloud setup. I am using AWS as an example.

Lets take the english statement, I want to create a document in a S3 bucket. Lets see how we translate this into a implementation in AWS. 
- What is the resource? Identify the resource you want to consume first, here in this case its S3. You can specifically choose a particular bucket or choose any bucket in your account. It is a good practice to limit the scope of the resource to as specific as possible 
- What are the actions? What I need to do with this resource. Here I need to create a document. But what is the exact action in AWS world, to know that refer AWS documentation of that resource. In case of S3 this is the  [url](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/service-authorization/latest/reference/list_amazons3.html) I used. From the documentation we know that its "PutObject" action
- Next Identity wether you want to allow something or deny something, by dafault we dont have any permissions, so if it was an empty new account, we have to allow. However, if you grant all action permissions to a resource but specifically deny a particular action, then we typically use Deny. Deny always trumps allow.
- Once you have done that, you can choose to add additional conditions. You can think of conditions as additional criteria to meet for this permission to apply. Conditions are specific to resources so you once again have to refer to documentation for the resource. An example being "s3:TlsVersion"

If you put all these together, we have put together what we call a **policy**. A policy make a bunch of statements on what actions can be performed on whic resources based on what conditions.

Once we have defined and created the policy, we go back to the "I" in the english statement of "I should be". The I here can refer to a user in AWS or it could be a role. In AWS jargon, it is associating a plocy to a user or a role.

Finally, if you want to access a resource from a different AWS account, we need to setup what we call as Trust Relationship between the accounts in which you configure each account to trust the other account. 

In summary, the IAM dance looks like:
- Define policy using
  - What action to allow or deny on what resource based on what conditions
- Associate the policy to a user or a role